---
title: Asynchronous Civics
layout: post
description: What's possible when we don't require intensive attention from one another.
---

Parenting, at least the way I do it, has a lot of time when I’m not
doing much, but it is time of a particular type.

It is time that is interrupted; interruptible; passing at places not
fully under my control; and during which I need to passively attend to
what my kids are doing.

Civic and political life is largely a life of meetings, which require
a different type of time: time of uninterrupted attention at specific
hours and locations.

I have almost none of that type of time. And so outside of the work I
do at DataMade, I haven’t participated very effectively in political
and civic life since my children were born.

In the last year, I have been working with three very talented
activists and researchers to understand the systemic dynamics of
Chicago Public Schools and contribute what we learn to the public
conversation about what schools are and should be.

It is the most satisfying and impactful, non-professional, civic
action I’ve done in the last twenty years.

We have had two meetings.

Most of what we’ve accomplished is because my collaborators are very
experienced, thoughtful, and seasoned in their expertise and
relationships.

But a lot is also due to the fact that we all take care of young
children, and have found a way to work together that doesn’t just
accommodate that, but takes advantage of the particular type of time
caregivers have.

It’s a group chat. 

And like all group chat you can dip in and out of it throughout the
day, catching up when you have a few minutes, and crucially, dropping
when you don’t.

I’ve spent hundreds of hours getting to know my collaborators,
learning from them, and expanding our vision of what could be
possible. I have the time to do that because it fits into my life and
my obligations. It doesn’t compete.

For generations, feminists have been pointing out how caregivers are
excluded from public life, and demanding childcare so that caregivers
can participate in meetings that require intensive time and attention.

It is absolutely right to demand that. But, I have also been
experiencing the power that is available if we don’t require intensive
time and attention from each other in order to build together.



